
"And yet," continued Lord Henry, in his low, musical voice, and with
that graceful wave of the hand that was always so characteristic of
him, and that he had even in his Eton days, "I believe that if one man
were to live out his life fully and completely, were to give form to
every feeling, expression to every thought, reality to every dream--I
believe that the world would gain such a fresh impulse of joy that we
would forget all the maladies of mediaevalism, and return to the
Hellenic ideal--to something finer, richer than the Hellenic ideal, it
may be.  But the bravest man amongst us is afraid of himself.  The
mutilation of the savage has its tragic survival in the self-denial
that mars our lives.  We are punished for our refusals.  Every impulse
that we strive to strangle broods in the mind and poisons us.  The body
sins once, and has done with its sin, for action is a mode of
purification.  Nothing remains then but the recollection of a pleasure,
or the luxury of a regret.  The only way to get rid of a temptation is
to yield to it.  Resist it, and your soul grows sick with longing for
the things it has forbidden to itself, with desire for what its
monstrous laws have made monstrous and unlawful.  It has been said that
the great events of the world take place in the brain.  It is in the
brain, and the brain only, that the great sins of the world take place
also.  You, Mr. Gray, you yourself, with your rose-red youth and your
rose-white boyhood, you have had passions that have made you afraid,
thoughts that have filled you with terror, day-dreams and sleeping
dreams whose mere memory might stain your cheek with shame--"

"Stop!" faltered Dorian Gray, "stop! you bewilder me.  I don't know
what to say.  There is some answer to you, but I cannot find it.  Don't
speak.  Let me think.  Or, rather, let me try not to think."

For nearly ten minutes he stood there, motionless, with parted lips and
eyes strangely bright.  He was dimly conscious that entirely fresh
influences were at work within him.  Yet they seemed to him to have
come really from himself.  The few words that Basil's friend had said
to him--words spoken by chance, no doubt, and with wilful paradox in
them--had touched some secret chord that had never been touched before,
but that he felt was now vibrating and throbbing to curious pulses.

Music had stirred him like that.  Music had troubled him many times.
But music was not articulate.  It was not a new world, but rather
another chaos, that it created in us.  Words!  Mere words!  How
terrible they were!  How clear, and vivid, and cruel!  One could not
escape from them.  And yet what a subtle magic there was in them!  They
seemed to be able to give a plastic form to formless things, and to
have a music of their own as sweet as that of viol or of lute.  Mere
words!  Was there anything so real as words?

Yes; there had been things in his boyhood that he had not understood.
He understood them now.  Life suddenly became fiery-coloured to him.
It seemed to him that he had been walking in fire.  Why had he not
known it?

With his subtle smile, Lord Henry watched him.  He knew the precise
psychological moment when to say nothing.  He felt intensely
interested.  He was amazed at the sudden impression that his words had
produced, and, remembering a book that he had read when he was sixteen,
a book which had revealed to him much that he had not known before, he
wondered whether Dorian Gray was passing through a similar experience.
He had merely shot an arrow into the air.  Had it hit the mark?  How
fascinating the lad was!

Hallward painted away with that marvellous bold touch of his, that had
the true refinement and perfect delicacy that in art, at any rate comes
only from strength.  He was unconscious of the silence.

"Basil, I am tired of standing," cried Dorian Gray suddenly.  "I must
go out and sit in the garden.  The air is stifling here."

"My dear fellow, I am so sorry.  When I am painting, I can't think of
anything else.  But you never sat better.  You were perfectly still.
And I have caught the effect I wanted--the half-parted lips and the
bright look in the eyes.  I don't know what Harry has been saying to
you, but he has certainly made you have the most wonderful expression.
I suppose he has been paying you compliments.  You mustn't believe a
word that he says."

"He has certainly not been paying me compliments.  Perhaps that is the
reason that I don't believe anything he has told me."

"You know you believe it all," said Lord Henry, looking at him with his
dreamy languorous eyes.  "I will go out to the garden with you.  It is
horribly hot in the studio.  Basil, let us have something iced to
drink, something with strawberries in it."

"Certainly, Harry.  Just touch the bell, and when Parker comes I will
tell him what you want.  I have got to work up this background, so I
will join you later on.  Don't keep Dorian too long.  I have never been
in better form for painting than I am to-day. This is going to be my
masterpiece.  It is my masterpiece as it stands."

Lord Henry went out to the garden and found Dorian Gray burying his
face in the great cool lilac-blossoms, feverishly drinking in their
perfume as if it had been wine.  He came close to him and put his hand
upon his shoulder.  "You are quite right to do that," he murmured.
"Nothing can cure the soul but the senses, just as nothing can cure the
senses but the soul."

The lad started and drew back.  He was bareheaded, and the leaves had
tossed his rebellious curls and tangled all their gilded threads.
There was a look of fear in his eyes, such as people have when they are
suddenly awakened.  His finely chiselled nostrils quivered, and some
hidden nerve shook the scarlet of his lips and left them trembling.

"Yes," continued Lord Henry, "that is one of the great secrets of
life--to cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses by means
of the soul.  You are a wonderful creation.  You know more than you
think you know, just as you know less than you want to know."

Dorian Gray frowned and turned his head away.  He could not help liking
the tall, graceful young man who was standing by him.  His romantic,
olive-coloured face and worn expression interested him.  There was
something in his low languid voice that was absolutely fascinating.
His cool, white, flowerlike hands, even, had a curious charm.  They
moved, as he spoke, like music, and seemed to have a language of their
own.  But he felt afraid of him, and ashamed of being afraid.  Why had
it been left for a stranger to reveal him to himself?  He had known
Basil Hallward for months, but the friendship between them had never
altered him.  Suddenly there had come some one across his life who
seemed to have disclosed to him life's mystery.  And, yet, what was
there to be afraid of?  He was not a schoolboy or a girl.  It was
absurd to be frightened.

"Let us go and sit in the shade," said Lord Henry.  "Parker has brought
out the drinks, and if you stay any longer in this glare, you will be
quite spoiled, and Basil will never paint you again.  You really must
not allow yourself to become sunburnt.  It would be unbecoming."

"What can it matter?" cried Dorian Gray, laughing, as he sat down on
the seat at the end of the garden.

"It should matter everything to you, Mr. Gray."

